# BLAES_Objects-Scenes_Manuscript_Wahlstrom
This repository contains all code used to analyze the data presented within the "Direct electrical stimulation of the human amygdala enhances recognition memory for objects but not scenes" manuscript by Wahlstrom et al. 2024

Abstract:
Emotional events are often remembered better than neutral events — a benefit that requires the amygdala. Studies suggest the basolateral amygdala (BLA) in particular, modulates memory-consolidation processes via interactions with downstream brain regions such as the hippocampus and adjacent medial temporal lobe structures. Furthermore, direct electrical stimulation of the BLA in humans enhances declarative memory, even for non-emotional events, and this memory enhancement is marked by oscillatory interactions between the BLA, hippocampus, and perirhinal cortex. However, the BLA disproportionately projects to the anterior hippocampus (aHC) and perirhinal cortex compared to the posterior hippocampus (pHC) and parahippocampal cortex, regions that process non-spatial information about objects and spatial information about scenes, respectively. Nevertheless, the premise that the BLA prioritizes some kinds of memories over others has not been directly tested in humans. 

In the current study we tested whether brief electrical stimulation to the BLA could differentially enhance declarative memory for specific images of objects and scenes. Epilepsy patients undergoing seizure monitoring via intracranial depth electrodes viewed a series of images of neutral objects and scenes, half of which were immediately followed by brief, low-amplitude electrical stimulation of the BLA. Amygdala stimulation elicited no subjective emotional response but enhanced memory for object images compared with no-stimulation control images when patients were given a recognition-memory test the next day. BLA stimulation had no effect on memory for scene images. 

We also leveraged direct electrical stimulation of the BLA to interrogate the effective connectivity between the amygdala and hippocampus. Using Single Pulse Evoked Potentials (SPEP) we determined how the amygdala interacts with the hippocampus to favor memory for objects compared to scenes. Overall, our results suggest that the BLA initiates memory prioritization processes by engaging the aHC to a greater extent than the pHC, providing fundamental insight into how BLA projections to hippocampal regions contribute to the neural dynamics of memory prioritization and opening a path to future therapies. 


Please see this Box Drive link for access to the image-sets used for this project: https://uofu.box.com/s/qc4bd2vphkmmlws828xs81mzqj7qj40d
